In reply to a DA parliamentary question regarding export protocol pertaining to ruminant and embryos, the Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform, Thoko Didiza said that in the past 8 years South Africa was able to export to Brazil, Paraguay, Argentina, Malaysia, Zambia, Namibia, Canada, Venezuela, Angola, and Guyana. However, what she failed to indicate were the quantities and the value per country and per year. Since countries differ substantially in terms of sanitary requirements and importance, the information that the Minister omitted is key information that would better enable all Members of Parliament to undertake adequate oversight on the Department. Minister Didiza has indicated that many protocols that South Africa had with countries were cancelled when South Africa lost its Foot and mouth disease (FMD) Free status in 2019. Our concern is that prior to 2019 South Africa was FMD free, yet the department has not given any explanation pertaining to the lack of export protocol agreements prior to South Africa being hit by Foot and Mouth Disease in such a severe manner that it affected exports of animal products. Despite its abundance of animals and animal products, South Africa is only able to export 4% of its beef products. The situation is unsustainable, and the department must take the blame for failing to develop  new export markets for farmers. According to Minister Didiza’s response, South Africa has agreed upon protocols for the export of bovine embryos to Brazil and Argentina and her department is in the process of negotiating an updated  protocol with Argentina, but exports may  still take place during the transition. The Minister, however, has failed to provide timelines of exchanges between South Africa and Argentina. Breeders and animal farmers have been experiencing problems with the department in responding or engaging those countries  interested in trading with livestock or animal products. Due to the unsatisfactory responses to our initial question, the DA will write to Minister Thoko Didiza again to request more information on the following: South Africa has experienced extremely poor performances with regard to livestock and animal products export protocol due to various non-compliant challenges. However, it remains crucial that the department provide clear and concise answers. And where  the department lacks capacity, the private sector is happy to assist the department to ensure that all animal farmers maximise their returns. The DA believes that if the government manages animal diseases and biosecurity appropriately, South African emerging and subsistence farmers will benefit from bilateral trade agreements.