Note to Editors: Please find an attached soundbite and affidavit by Dianne Kohler Barnard MP. The DA has today opened a criminal case against former director-general (DG) at the Department of Correctional Services and former DG of the State Security Agency (SSA), Arthur Fraser, regarding irregularities during his time at the SSA. It was under Fraser’s watch as deputy director for operations at the SSA that the Principle Agent Network (PAN) was established. Millions, if not billions of rands were reportedly siphoned off or spent irregularly, and the DA is requesting the South African Police Service (SAPS) to investigate possible criminal offences. The DA is also laying charges regarding Fraser’s possible involvement with the recording of the ‘spy tapes’ – some of which may have been obtained illegally – which played an instrumental role in dismissing the 783 corruption charges against former President Jacob Zuma relating to a arms deal with Thales in 1999 worth R2.5 billion. Weeks later Zuma became South Africa’s president. In instances where the recordings were indeed legal, we believe that Fraser’s involvement in handing them over to Zuma’s legal team should be investigated as 42(1) of the Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of Communication-Related Information Act 70 of 2002 states that no person may disclose any legally intercepted communications, except in certain limited circumstances. I laid charges against Fraser in 2009, and John Steenhuisen as the then Chief Whip of the DA, did too in 2017. Both cases disappeared without trace. Given the political climate of the day, and the zero tolerance stance South Africans are now taking against corruption and political interference, we believe that SAPS will do its utmost in investigating these charges against Fraser, as well as the revelation that he lied on his CV causing prejudice to South African society. Given Fraser’s political access, the DA is sure that it’s only a matter of time before he’s given an Ambassadorial post and finds himself beyond the reach of local law enforcement. We cannot allow a man who might have played an integral part in the capturing of our State and the travesty of justice to get away with it.