Please find an attached soundbite by Andrew Whitfield MP On 14 February, following President Ramaphosa’s State of the Nation Address, the Leader of the DA, John Steenhuisen, tabled a Motion of No Confidence in the President’s Cabinet of Ministers. This was done in terms of Section 102 (1) of the Constitution. If South Africa has any chance of turning the corner, away from the wasted years of state capture to years of growth and prosperity, this Cabinet that failed our nation must go. Starting with the President’s KwaZulu-Natal Comrade, the Minister of Police, Bheki Cele. The DA has long argued that there is simply no justifiable reason to keep Minister Cele in Cabinet. One of the promises the President committed to in his first term in office was to halve the incidents of violent crime. Yet, halfway through this term, the crime statistics repeatedly highlight that under the watch of Bheki Cele as Police Minister, SAPS is losing the war against violent crime. Minister Cele’s power battles with the National Police Commissioner, General Kehla Sitole, have revealed his poor leadership ability and undermined effective policing. The failure of the SAPS to implement its crime prevention strategy and manage rampant criminality stems from the fact that cadres have been employed over honest and professional officers for too many years. However, Minister Cele’s most catastrophic failure is his clear dereliction of duty during and after the riots in July 2021. The panel of experts report into the July unrest found that the security cluster, of which Police is a key component, failed to respond timeously to the unrest. Instead of taking responsibility for failing to protect lives and property that was lost during the unrest, Cele chose to play the blame game and accuse everyone other than himself for this glaring failure. If this failure does not convince President Ramaphosa that the Police Minister must go, perhaps the following will: Evidently, Mr Cele cannot be regarded as a vanguard of South Africa’s fight against crime; rather, he is a product of the ANC’s cadre deployment and political horse-trading – both of which are synonymous with the party. He must go.