Please find attached soundbite by Ghaleb Cachalia MP. The DA cautiously welcomes reports that President Cyril Ramaphosa is about to declare an energy emergency to respond to the electricity crisis. At the bare minimum, we expect a plan with key deliverables and set timelines that will have a clear roadmap of when new generation capacity will be brought online. South Africans have been taken for a ride over the years with Eskom turnaround plans that have dismally failed to end the loadshedding crisis. This time around, the DA stands ready to hold government’s feet to the fire and ensure that all the stakeholders involved in implementing the energy response plan are held accountable. As part of efforts to ensure that implementation of the energy emergency plan remains on track and is accountable to South Africans, the DA will propose the establishment of an ad-hoc parliamentary committee. Parliament should play a central role in enforcing accountability and sustained implementation of project deliverables. While the President’s anticipated announcement has taken longer than necessary, considering the devastating impact that loadshedding is having on the economy and livelihoods, we are encouraged that, exactly 63 days since we asked Cabinet to promulgate an Electricity Emergency Response Plan to respond to the electricity crisis, action is now being taken. The DA strongly believes that any energy emergency declaration must be ring-fenced around the electricity value chain, from generation, distribution and transmission. In the short term, South Africa needs to secure the amount of power made available by Eskom’s fleet of power plants to meet the minimum demands by consumers, in addition to opening up – with speed – alternative sources of supply to meet the nation’s requirements. We would encourage and support any and all augmentation – internal and external – to generation on a source-agnostic and lowest-cost basis. As such, the DA believes the energy emergency declaration should: The underlying premise of the DA’s call for a state of disaster on Eskom and the electricity sector is that, in view of the dire state of the country’s electricity generation capacity, South Africa should be making it easy, not difficult, for IPPs to bring new power at scale and in the shortest possible time. To this end, an energy declaration should: The DA looks forward to having the energy emergency declaration tabled in Parliament as a matter of urgency so that we can begin the process of freeing South Africans from the shackles of loadshedding.